[theme music playing]
[contestants chattering indistinctly]
[Sandi] Three remaining bakers.
Breathe in.
[Sophie] Breathe into the apron
[Sandi] Three final challenges.
From the beginning,
Steven seemed unstoppable
You wouldn't think that wasn't bread.
[Sandi] But his ingenious designs...
That is ridiculous.
...haven't always been
matched with great flavours
Overall, it's a bit bland.
But the three time Star Baker
fought his way to the final.
[Steven] I've ticked every box,
handshakes, Star Bakers,
there's that huge box
that needs one big tick in it,
the winner.
[Noel] Kate's road to the final
has been rocky.
So nearly worked, didn't it?
[Noel] But her creativity...
I love that octopus.
[Noel] ...historic inspiration...
I researched into
the recipes on-board the Titanic.
[Noel] ...and her bold flavours...
[Paul] The mango with the curry
just works.
Very clever.
[Noel] ...ensured a steady rise.
The cake is sensational.
[Kate] I do wanna win,
but I'm not gonna be
arrogant enough to think
the other two bakers in there
aren't fantastic.
[Sandi] Through the outset,
Sophie has marched through
the challenges with military precision.
-[gasps]
-[Paul] That's delicious.
[Sandi] But for the two times Star Baker,
there's one enemy that threatened defeat.
Bread, bread, bread, bread.
[Paul] The dough's quite underdone.
I hate bread.
[Paul]
The apples don't really look that green.
It's a dark art that I'm yet to master.
[Sophie] I never thought I'd get this far.
It's just like a big thumbs up.
Yes, this is what you're meant to do.
For your final Signature Challenge.
Paul and Prue
would like you to bake a batch
of 12 small loaves,
but obviously they're not
gonna make it that easy for you.
No. They want you to make
three different types of bread.
So four of your loaves
need to be intricately shaped,
so I don't know, plaited, for example.
Four need to be flavoured
and four need
to be made with an alternative grain
such as spelt or buckwheat.
You've got three hours
to make 12 small loaves
-On your marks...
-[Sandi] Get set.
...bake.
[Steven] Good luck, guys.
[Prue] This is the final.
I woke up this morning so excited.
Whoever wins it will be amazing.
The Signature is something
I particularly love. Bread.
We've asked the bakers
to produce 12 loaves.
[Prue] Three different types,
different baking times,
different proving times.
It would be very easy
to get into a muddle.
[Paul] It's critical to remain calm,
be absolutely confident about what
you're doing, and create baking magic.
[Paul] Hello, Sophie.
[Sophie] Morning.
-Hello, Sophie.
-[Noel] Hiya, folks.
-[Prue] Finals day?
-Yes.
-Excited?
-Nervous, yeah.
[Noel]
Sophie's attempting round Spelt loaves,
ciabattas flavoured with wild mushrooms
and plaited brioche flavoured with orange.
You've picked two breads
that take a long time to make.
Brioche, technically overnight.
Ciabatta, a long prove.
Yep, 'cause I thought
that was a great idea,
not really realising
that I'd stitched myself up a little bit.
You'll be more impressed
though if she pulls it off, right?
Exactly. You will have shown three skills,
never mind all the other
shaping and flavouring and...
-It's the final, you gotta go for it.
-...as well.
Gotta go for it.
[Sandi] Kate is playing
this final Signature a little safer.
I'm keeping the doughs quite simple
and just working a good bake on it.
[Sandi] She'll shape her
simple white dough into flowers,
and she's also making Spelt loaves
and a flavoured loaf filled with curry,
sweetened with yet another one
of her discoveries.
Jaggery Goor.
-Bit of Jaggery. Do you wanna try some?
-[Sandi] Yeah.
[Kate] It's basically sugar.
[Sandi] Like a cane sugar type of thing?
[Kate] Yeah.
[chokes] Oh, right,
my whole body's perked up.
That's... What a lovely flavour.
[Kate] I kind of got into Jaggery
when I found it in like this little shop
back home in Liverpool on Bold Street.
Do you just go round shops trying to find
things nobody's heard of to cook with?
Yeah. Rummaging in the back
of the supermarket shelves.
You think, "Ah, here's a thing."
[Noel] Whilst Kate and Steven's
first doughs are ready for proving...
[Steven] That's gonna go for an hour.
[Noel] ...Sophie's brioche
is already proving time-consuming.
Enriching the dough,
and it's a lot of butter.
A lot of butter. [chuckles]
Right, er...
[Noel] For his second flavoured dough...
Bake garlic.
[Noel] ...Steven isn't holding back.
[Steven] I'm gonna
whole roast these garlics,
and you think three bulbs
in four loaves is a lot.
It just becomes a really sweet
mellow flavour and it's really good.
[Sandi] Steven's making flavoured loaves
with garlic, rosemary, and fontina cheese.
He's also making Spelt and Rye loaves
and his shaped loaves
filled with chocolate and cinnamon
have been inspired by his boyhood hobbies.
The shaped one
is gonna be a Winston knot...
-A what?
-...and that...
-A Winston knot.
-[Noel] What's that?
[Steven] I think
it's a tie knot, isn't it?
[Prue] It's got three strands
to it, hasn't it?
Yes. I remember doing knots
when I was in Scouts,
just because I wanted to get that badge.
Channelling your childhood.
I did get my badge, and for baking.
[Noel] Steven began baking
long before he joined the Scouts.
Did you cut your own hair?
[Steven] I think I might've
let my friend do it.
[Judy] Steven and I both share
a passion for cooking.
He was always clearing up
after me in the kitchen.
[Kate] I don't think my mum realises
just how much she influences him
and how much she helps him,
how much of a guide she is to him.
I think my mum will be
quite surprised to realise
that a lot of this is to do with her.
I am immensely proud.
He's my Star Baker.
[Steven] That is flavoured dough.
[Noel] The more doughs
the bakers complete...
[Steven] That's gonna go down for an hour.
[Noel] ...the more complicated
this final Signature bake becomes.
[Sophie] You leave it in this
until it's about doubled in size.
[Noel] Each dough will have
a different proving time,
and it gets harder.
They'll need to budget
enough remaining time
for a second prove,
then the baking itself.
The second prove will vary depending
on how well they've done.
[Noel] And if nine variable timings
wasn't enough to contend with...
On to do number three.
[Noel] ...all three finalists
are attempting a dough using spelt flour.
[Sophie] I'm doing this one by hand
because it's very easy to overwork spelt,
you just end up with a chewing gum.
How's that doing?
This is spelt and rye.
[Kate] It's the same stuff that
the Roman army
would've eaten with olive oil.
Obviously, I'm gonna
do something historic, aren't I?
And I'm obsessed,
me favourite film's Gladiator.
So I've got a running joke
with me dad about that.
[Barry] There you are, Kate,
by the pyramids.
Growing up she was
into many different things.
It started with dance school and drama.
Fishing, doing the martial arts.
Horse-riding.
Brownies.
Go-karting.
Then she started baking.
Kate is doing a Master's Degree
in Occupational Health and Safety
as well as doing a full time job,
as well as practising all the recipes.
It's just amazing, it really is.
[Noel] As well as three doughs
of three different proving times...
[Kate] I'm just gonna
go get another timer.
[Noel] ...Kate's given herself
something else to keep track of.
[Kate] This is for the inside
of me flavoured bread,
like a Peshawari filling.
So I'm just putting some Jaggery
in now which will just sweeten it up.
[Noel] And she's not the only one
spending time on a filling.
[Sophie] Don't know what they'll think
of wild mushroom ciabatta.
I like it. That's all that matters.
-[Linda] Is that your christening?
-That is my christening.
She's always been very determined, yes.
Even as a little girl,
she did like to make her own big cakes.
The ballet school, I think
she would've carried on with the ballet
but she just got too tall.
The army was the most surprising one.
When she puts her heart into something,
she goes and gets it.
Very proud of Sophie,
I've always been proud of Sophie.
[David] I am incredibly proud of Sophie.
To come up with some
of the stuff she's done is quite amazing.
Absolutely incredible.
The thought of Sophie's name
being called out that she's been crowned
the best baker in Britain,
even from an Irish perspective.
You got to the end, and you might win.
-Well...
-[Linda] You'd be famous.
Can't go to Tesco's
in my pyjamas any more.
[Sandi] You just wanna get
bread over with, don't you?
[Sophie] Yeah, and do you know what?
That's not really the filling
I should have on finals,
but I know I'm not great at it,
so it's just gonna like,
let's get it over done with.
-Get that one done.
-Yeah.
[Noel] Bakers, we are halfway
through your final Signature Challenge.
Anyone need anything? You warm enough?
Current tent temperature.
I've had bad experiences
with this proving drawer,
best just to stay clear of it.
[Kate] That's half an hour.
[Sandi] Now the maths
gets even more complicated.
Yeah, I've got about 15 minutes
until I make the Winston knot.
No, I've got two minutes
until I make the Winston knot
and 15 minutes in which to do them.
[Sandi] The judges will expect loaves
that are uniform in size and shape.
[Kate] I'm just bread measuring.
I think we should
give them Roman soldier names,
'cause this is what
the Roman army used to eat.
-Yeah.
-So that's Maximus.
-Maximus.
-Decimus, Aurelius, and, erm...
-Stuart?
-Stuart.
[Sandi] But every minute
spent weighing and shaping...
[Kate] These two get crossed over.
...is a minute they won't have
for a second prove and baking.
Apparently, it's like
a French sort of design.
It's a bit different
to like the traditional knot shape
You think it would be easy to get things
to look the same, but it's not.
I'm glad I went to Scouts.
I'm not sure
it did much for my knot-making skills.
[Sophie] That is now going to prove again.
I'm just gonna give them like 20 minutes.
To get it in there. It's cinnamon,
sugar and chocolate chips.
Weighing out my ciabatta
so it can go on for its second prove.
This is called a couche,
which is French for bed,
and it just gives the dough
a little bit of support while it's rising.
Bring it to bed.
[Noel] There's just 45 minutes remaining
in the final Signature Challenge.
[Kate] I'd really like to give it
a long time to second prove,
but I'd rather it be baked in the oven,
so I need to get them in.
[Sophie] I'm running out of time.
They gotta go in, ready or not.
[Steven] This is flavoured dough.
It's only gonna get
a little bit of a prove.
Right, I need to get a wriggle on now.
That was a bit of a balls that one.
[Steven sighs in exasperation]
[Kate] Start them off quite high
so I'm sure they'll get a nice crust
on them and then I'll drop it down.
[Steven] I wanted to give them
another 15 minutes proving,
but I would rather they were baked.
Bakers, you only have half an hour left.
Not the best they've looked,
but at least they're not worse.
I don't think I'm gonna have
enough oven space,
so what I'm gonna have to do
is move these all onto one baking sheet.
Right, let's get these babies in the oven.
These, actually,
have puffed up quite quickly.
[Sophie] These are my spelt loaves.
I'm scoring them 'cause as they rise,
if I didn't, they'd just burst out
at the weakest point, which is usually
on the bottom.
[Steven] That's annoyingly misshapen.
[Kate] It's really not enough space.
[Sophie] That's everything in now,
by the skin of my teeth.
So hopefully they won't be under baked.
One has split horribly in the middle.
Probably in my haste
to get them in the oven.
[sighs in exasperation] No pressure.
[Sophie] I'm concerned there won't be
enough air bubbles in my ciabatta,
but I'm afraid that my spelt
will be like bricks. [chuckles]
Feel like I want to do
one of those yoga poses.
Oh, oh, actually. Oh. [laughs]
[Noel] What's happening in there?
[Steven] My loaf has split.
That's okay though, isn't it?
It's not the end of the world,
it's just irritating.
Hmm, imagine if it was
the end of the world.
Your loaves split
and everything went... [makes bomb noises]
[Kate] Should've got them in sooner.
I'm gonna whip them out
in about one minute to go.
[Steven] Well, I hope it's tasteful,
carry me a little bit.
-How long have we got left?
-Just one minute remaining.
[Kate] Really don't wanna drop
any of these,
'cause that would just be horrific.
[Steven]
This is what happens when you rush.
[Steven] God, they're all split open.
Bakers, your time is up.
Not very happy with ciabatta.
[Sophie] Oh, God,
everyone's looks beautiful.
[Sandi] It's judgement time
in the final Signature Challenge.
-Hello, Sophie.
-Hi.
-How you doing? Hello.
[Paul] I think they look very good.
I do like the plait, it's a little bit
under proved, but not much.
The naan bread looks interesting.
I wouldn't call that a ciabatta really.
[Prue] Well, let's see how it tastes.
I mean, I must say that
I'm impressed by the look of them,
especially the spelt ones.
I think, it looks really good.
[Sandi] Sounds good.
[Paul] It is slightly under proved,
and therefore, what follows
is it's slightly under baked.
[Prue] I'll tell you what,
the flavour is lovely.
-Mmm. Great flavour.
-Really nice flavour.
[Prue] I think spelt bread
is not the tastiest.
[Sandi] Good start.
[Paul] Let's look at this ciabatta,
shall we?
[Paul] I always cut ciabatta's this way
'cause you get more
of an indication of the overall structure.
A pretty nice structure,
but not as open as it could be.
Smells really mushroomy.
They were dried mushrooms, weren't they?
Erm, some dried, some sautéed.
[Paul] It works. It brings you
two different textures then.
And they do taste very, very good.
I wouldn't call it a ciabatta though.
Right, let's have a look at this.
Great structure.
Great, look at that.
[Prue] And you know
the orange really works,
I didn't think it would.
[Paul] Excellent flavour. Soft crumb.
Great texture on the outside,
and the plaiting's very good as well.
-Thank you very much indeed.
-Thank you.
Hmm, they definitely do look
a little different, don't they?
And that one does not look
much like that one.
They do look pretty terrible,
but look at the consistency,
they do look awful.
[Steven] So the bread
has the garlic running through it
and then there's some cheese
and rosemary in the centre.
[Prue] Smells good.
It's actually a little disappointing
'cause it's quite tough.
-Your dough needed more water.
-Okay.
[Paul] Dry dough
will split wherever it wants to go,
and that's what's caused that,
-and that to all be totally different.
-Yeah.
-[Paul] These don't look good either.
It's massively under proved.
Rye bread tends to rip
because that one there...
[Prue] Yeah. I agree
with those he's trying to put away.
[Paul] It instantly means
that you've under proved it.
-Yeah.
-[Paul] But let's have a taste.
It's probably gonna
be slightly doughy inside.
And it tastes like gluey in your...
[Steven] Mmm.
...in your mouth. Nice flavour though.
[Paul] Beautiful flavour.
Just right the rye and the spelt.
[Paul] The Winston knots...
[Prue] They are so artisanal
and real and beautiful.
It's always tricky
when you put something into the middle.
Does it destroy the crumb?
I think you've done quite well
on the sweet one there.
That is very good.
[Prue] It's delicious.
I think the chocolate's really good,
and you've got just enough cinnamon,
it's not overpowering.
Under proved, under proved, perfect.
-Thank you very much, Steven.
-Thank you.
[Prue] Thank you.
[Paul] Thank you.
I must say, I think these are interesting
and they look absolutely beautiful.
-Now this is the spelt?
-Yeah.
[Paul] It's got a little rip
but a nice neat pattern.
I'm not gonna fault the actual flavour,
except that I think
if you'd had a little salt in there,
you'd have enhanced it.
Erm, I quite like it.
You push it, it springs back,
which is a good sign.
Let's have a look at these.
Nice. That's the sound I like to hear.
Great structure.
You can tell, you see
where the knife drags the dough?
It doesn't cut through
like a cake, it's pulling.
So you have this tension there.
I think the texture's perfect.
Nice and crisp on the outside.
I'm getting a little bit of flavour
in there as well, which is good.
-Okay.
-[Sandi] That's a good one.
-Oh, right.
-[Prue] Right.
Now, let's look at these ones.
-It's a filled one, isn't it?
-[Kate] Yeah.
[Prue] I see.
[Kate] Oh, no.
[Sandi] You all right?
What's he thinking? [laughs]
[Sandi] You can never tell.
I'll tell you what I think.
I think it's got a lovely texture.
I think it's properly baked,
I like the curry,
and I like the flaky edge.
It tastes divine.
The structure's spot on,
I like the filling.
-Something I might even look at.
-[chuckles]
I think overall you've done very well.
-[Prue] Well done, Kate.
-Thanks.
That is much better
than expected. Whoo. [laughs]
Yeah, I... I mean.
I did it as well as
I could've done in the time.
I thought bread was gonna be my undoing,
and it's nice to know
I'm not starting from behind.
[Steven] I am frustrated with myself.
But then I think, "What's the point?"
It's not going to change anything.
[Noel] Now the finalists face mastering,
not one but two levels
of absolute baking precision.
It's time for your
final Technical Challenge,
which today has been set for you by Prue.
Prue have you been
kind to the finalists?
[all laughing]
It's all about the bake.
No treble.
[Noel] It's all about the bake.
[Prue] It's all about the bake.
As ever, the Technical
will be judged blind.
So I'm gonna have to ask you
crazy kids to skedaddle. Off you go.
For your final Technical Challenge,
Prue would like you
to make ten ginger biscuits
baked to perfection with a powerful snap.
Prue wants half of them to be oval,
and the other half to be square,
but they all need to be intricately iced.
[Noel] You have two and a half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set.
...bake.
[Noel] The finalists
all have identical ingredients.
[Steven clears throat]
And Prue's pared down recipe.
It seems quite straightforward,
which worries me.
Some lace pattern,
it does look complicated.
[Prue] This is the final,
and what could be more of a classic
British bake than a ginger biscuit.
They are exquisite.
It's all Royal icing.
We've said it must be
exactly these decorations.
They should be able to look at that
and know that they should first pipe
the outline and then flood it.
Of course, you'll need a thicker icing
for the baubles
than you need for the flooding.
Although, the icing
is very intricate and difficult to do,
we want a really crisp
perfect biscuit. Beautiful.
So we are looking for a nice snap
with these biscuits, aren't we?
-Still a wafer.
-Make it crack.
I love the fact you're dunking.
-I'm too posh to dunk.
-Are you?
-You didn't see it.
-You're never too posh to dunk.
Dead right.
It just says, "Make the ginger biscuits
using the creaming method."
After this morning, I'd like to do
much better in this afternoon's Technical.
It's a bit hard to get
tablespoons of beaten egg.
[Kate] One, two.
I'm expecting that
to be quite a stiff dough.
Done it wrong. I put too much egg in.
[Steven] I was focusing
so much on the muscovado
that I put too much egg in.
Awkward.
[plates clattering]
Right, try again.
After each stage they need to be frozen.
[Kate] It's quite a wet dough.
I expect it will firm up
when it gets in the fridge.
[Sophie]
There is no indication of thickness.
Just give it a couple of millimetres.
You want them nice and thin.
Will it fit? [chuckles]
It's not gonna fit.
Kate's done it wrong again.
Oh, this isn't idea.
This is human error in action.
[Sandi] Two hours remaining
in the final Technical Challenge.
Make 8 x 8 square templates
and a 10 x 7 oval.
This is not 10 x 7.
So I'm gonna have to free hand.
Oval's free hand I'm assuming,
which will be unamusing.
I have never drawn
an oval before in my life.
I do feel like I'm back
at like a school art class.
Not very ovally, it's annoying me.
Yeah, that's probably close enough.
So yours is more like a sort of...
-Don't. No, no...
-No?
I was gonna say egg. Don't say egg.
-It is a little egg-like.
-It is a bit.
It looks like something that Mork
-from Mork and Mindy travelled in.
-I used to love that show.
I just wanna make sure I can get five.
So one, two...
[Kate] Three...
Oh, idiot.
It needs to be quite a lot bigger.
[Sophie] Just gonna freeze those,
and then stick in the oven.
[Steven] They shouldn't
take that long to bake.
[Kate] I'm gonna cut them out afterwards,
'cause I don't want the outsides to burn.
All about finesse.
Bakers, you are halfway
through your ginger biscuits.
Let's get these in the oven.
[Kate] Doesn't even say
how long to bake the biscuits for.
[Steven] Just says bake.
So I'm going up to seven minutes
and check them thereafter.
Eight minutes. That sounds about right.
[Steven] I'm doing it for five minutes.
I will keep an eye on it though.
It's all about the bake.
[Sophie] Prue said,
you know, all about the bake.
It's all about the bake.
[Steven] This is royal icing,
icing sugar, egg whites and lemon juice.
[Kate] Alls I can taste is just sweet air.
Try not to mix it too hard
'cause the icing sugar
will get away with me.
Right, that's five minutes.
[Sophie] Hmm, can see them
browning around the edge.
This is how I normally do it
'cause I didn't want the edges to burn.
Tempted to put them
back in actually, couple more minutes.
Gonna put the squares back in,
they just feel a little softer.
[Kate] I'm gonna get them back
in the oven.
Hmm.
[Steven] Just doing them in increments
of two minutes, just to see how they look.
[Kate] It needs a little bit longer
'cause if they'll have
a nice snap to them.
[Sophie] I think I am happy with those.
[Steven] They're nice and thin,
they smell good.
[Kate] Couple more minutes.
Just like a minute.
They just spread a little bit.
I didn't freeze them long enough.
Ah, snap.
Put them back in for
a little flash of like a minute.
[Sandi] Bakers, you have one hour left.
-How much time is that per biscuit?
-Six.
-Minutes.
-Six minutes.
-Which ones are the minutes again?
-Go away. Go.
[Steven] Pipe flower pattern onto the oval
and pipe lace onto the square.
Simple right?
Let's give it a go.
A bit too dark. I've burned me biccies
I hate rushing decorating.
[Sophie]
Definitely the fastest I've ever iced.
[Sandi] Is it enjoyable?
-I wouldn't go that far.
-[laughs]
[Kate] At home it took me
all day to ice 12 biscuits.
Er, you've got four
and a half minutes per biscuit left.
-Right.
-Yeah.
-Okay.
-I'm just thinking they're looking...
They're lovely, they're beautiful,
they're a little on the plain side.
[Sophie] I'm having two different
consistencies for piping and for flooding.
[Kate] A lot more to do
than pipe the first lot.
No time to redo anything.
This is so much intricate detail on here.
If I can just get
some basics done on these.
[Sophie] Draw the line,
and then it kind of semi-sets.
Flood the white icing
and then pipe the flower straight on top.
[Kate] I should've
just done that in hindsight,
but I decided to flood ice everything.
[Sophie] What I'm going to do
is do the same on each one
and then go back and add detail.
[Kate] Well, I think everyone's got
their own technique for flood icing now.
If I run out of time,
I'll just have to serve them, won't I?
[Steven] My hand is surprisingly steady
actually considering how nervous I am.
I think everybody
needs to learn how to speed pipe.
Bakers, you have ten minutes left.
[Kate] Just not enough time at all.
[Steven] If I can just get as much done
on these coloured ones.
[Sophie] I'm just gonna pipe
some dots round the flooded ones.
[Kate] I literally can't give you
eye contact right now
unless you're a biscuit
and you need some icing on you.
I mean, look how many
biscuit's that are un-iced.
-Do you want me to do one for you?
-No.
[Steven] I haven't actually taken
more than about three breaths
in the last two minutes.
[Sophie] I haven't breathed,
I haven't looked up.
They're looking increasingly messier.
[Kate] It's actually really hard
going on your hand.
[sighs in exasperation]
Back's killing me.
Bakers, time is up.
Step away from your nozzles.
-They look good, mate.
-Have you both finished?
[Sandi] Prue and Paul are expecting
ten exquisitely delicious ginger biscuits
with a perfect snap.
And they'll have no idea whose is whose.
[Paul] Shall we start
with this one then, Prue?
They're beautifully even.
Likewise with the oval.
There has been flooding.
[Prue] The icing is nice and thin.
It could've been a little bit thinner
in order to flood it better
'cause this is a bit lumpy.
That went snap.
-It did.
-Nice and crisp.
That is a very good ginger biscuit.
Lovely flavour.
[Paul]
There's a couple of issues with this one.
One, they're not finished,
two, they're very different.
-They aren't the same as that.
-[Paul] No.
[Prue] But they might be
redeemed by the bake.
-Nice crunch.
-Mmm.
It's a bit dark, that one, actually.
Tastes good.
[Prue] Texture is beautiful.
[Paul] Yeah, but the problem is,
look, there's nothing on them.
-These are quite neat actually.
-[Prue] Mmm-hmm.
[Paul] And they're quite big,
you know, the blobs on them.
But they are finished.
The biscuits aren't very square.
[Prue] They've spread
a tiny bit in the oven.
-[Paul] Yeah.
-This still looks a very good biscuit.
Yeah. Nice snap.
Flavours very good, texture's very good.
Let's have a look at the other one.
It's flooded well, this.
I just think it's lost something.
The piping here is not blobs.
If the icing had been a bit thicker,
you would have got that
perfect bobbly edge.
[Sandi] But who has triumphed
in the last Technical Challenge?
This is third place.
Oh, what a surprise.
-Well, Kate you know you didn't finish.
-Yeah.
Second place is this one.
The consistency
of the icing was slightly off,
and some of your biscuits
were slightly round.
But they were all finished, so well done.
That leaves Steven in first place.
-Steven, the icing isn't perfect.
-No.
But it is more intricate,
and you have tried hard to get the shape.
It's a really good crack
and a nice biscuit.
Thank you.
[sighs in relief]
I was willing that...
I was willing that to happen.
[Sophie] There is a chance,
but everything tomorrow
is going to have to be bang on.
Fair enough,
came third, didn't finish them.
I mean, I had a good bake on the bread
and going into the Showstopper
I think everyone's gonna be
starting from roughly the same point.
[Noel] Just one challenge remains
in this year's competition.
Coming into today, I think
what we've got is two challenges
that turn everything upside down.
Initially, we put Kate on top,
close to Sophie and then Steven.
The Technical, is then Steven, Sophie,
and Kate, so it's literally reversed.
The fact of the matter is whoever wins
the Showstopper is going to be the winner.
What happens if they're all even
at the end of the Showstopper?
-I'm walking out of here.
-[laughs]
-You win, Noel.
-Do I?
-Yeah.
-Amazing.
[sighs]
Morning, bakers,
and welcome to the last ever challenge
before one of you
is named champion of 2017.
For your final Showstopper,
Paul and Prue would love you
to make a large entremet.
Now, as we all know, an entremet
is a thing that Sandi knows about.
An entremet is a light delicate
multi-layered cake
that was originally served
as a dessert between courses.
Your entremet must have
a minimum of five elements,
one of which must be sponge,
and the entire cake
should be covered in perhaps a glaze.
Or maybe a ganache, whichever you choose.
Your entremet should be decorated
to the highest of standards,
and when sliced,
should hold together perfectly
with each of the
delicate layers clearly visible.
[Noel] You have five hours.
-On your marks, get set, bake.
[Sandi] A perfect entremet
is a flawlessly decorated mousse cake
filled with distinct delicate layers
delivering contrasting textures
and complimentary flavours.
The three bakers are probably
very, very nervous.
This is technically
a very difficult challenge to get right.
The sponge is one element of it,
but they need to bring in
other elements too.
A mousse, a bavarois, a jelly or meringue,
but you've gotta get it
all working in unison.
If you've got five or six
or seven or eight different elements,
when you get a mouthful,
whatever's in that spoon
must be delicious.
They've gotta work backwards.
How long have I got to make this?
How long does it take
for the jelly to set,
the sponge to be cool?
It's very, very tricky.
[Prue] I've been so impressed
with those bakers,
and I know that
they can all do incredibly well,
so I want every one of them to be so good
that we struggle to choose a winner.
-Hello, Sophie.
-Hello, morning.
-[Prue] Hi, Sophie.
-Hi.
What are you doing?
I have named mine
"The Ode to the Honeybee."
I just love honey, I find it fascinating.
I think it's incredible just how different
it can taste, it's like wine really.
[Noel] A tempered
chocolate honeybee and flower
will decorate a marbled
white chocolate mirror glaze entremet
containing several layers
featuring honey custard,
blackberry jelly, orange blossom sponge,
hazelnut feuilletine, lemon curd,
and a lavender mousse.
[Prue] Do you think
all these things go together?
[Sophie] I think actually
the honey and the lemon
and the lavender...
I think it all harmonises quite well.
I'm trying to think lemon and lavender.
-[Prue] I think that could...
-Could be interesting.
I think that'll work. Honey bees like
all those things, don't they?
-Yeah.
-[Prue] So why shouldn't we?
Well, let's hope
there's no sting in the tail.
[Sandi] Aw, did you see what he did there?
-I'm gonna take him away now...
-Yeah, please do.
[Sandi] ...and put him in a dark room.
Come with me, people.
[Sandi] Even at the beginning
of this final Showstopper,
the bakers will have to move fast.
[Steven] I want the whole thing
to be freezing
within sort of two and a half hours.
My countdown timer is everything.
[Sandi] Unless they set
their individual layers quickly,
they won't be firm enough to stack
so they can construct their entremet.
It's such a process
to get everything chilled,
you can't just stack it all on top
of each other and hope for the best.
So what I'm doing here is custard.
This is the one I want
to get done first, it's got to freeze.
Just got some blackberries,
some sugar and some lemon juice.
I'm just gonna mash
that down and make it into a puree.
So a couple of jobs
on the go at the same time.
This is what we call
"Concurrent activity,"
and this is an actual principle of war.
-[Noel] In the battle for the crown...
-Multitasking is principle of war.
...Kate's opened up an Eastern front.
[Kate] I've coloured my lychee jelly
with red food colouring
because the whole entremet's
gonna be white,
and I really just wanted
a flash of colour in the middle,
so that's like the Japanese flag.
[Sandi] Kate's jelly will sit at the heart
of a Japanese-inspired
white chocolate mirror-glazed entremet.
Decorated with shards
of black sesame tuile,
dragon fruit dice
and a tempered chocolate butterfly.
And all her layers will be encased
in a set custard known as a bavarois,
flavoured with an Oriental twist.
-What's that?
-Yuzu juice.
Yuzu juice. Like lemon.
It's like lemon mixed with mandarin, yeah.
[Noel] You look calm.
Do I? My bake's all about Zen today so...
-[Noel] Right.
-...that's what I'm channelling.
What you gonna do if you win?
If I do, I'm gonna
do something ridiculous.
-Streak?
-Streak.
-Through the tent.
-I'm gonna do a naked cartwheel.
[laughing]
This is the first layer of custard,
gonna get this freezing.
[Sophie] One thing down,
another six to do.
[Kate] It's a rising sun.
[Sandi] Kate's not the only one
headed to the Far East,
but Steven's given himself
twice as far to travel.
It's a big entremet.
It's two halves, it'll be a yin yang.
A yin yang is a representation
of light and dark,
and the two can't exist
without one another.
[Sandi] Caramelised bananas
with rum, crème brûlèe, raspberry coulis,
chocolate mousse, honeycomb feuilletine,
and hazelnut Genoise sponge
will be layered in two separate moulds.
And if 14 elements wasn't enough,
the two halves
will have contrasting decoration.
One will be mirror-glazed
with a galaxy scene
with a Northern Lights streak.
The other half
will be sprayed with warm chocolate
onto the frozen surface
and it leaves what looks like velvet.
Is this inspired by something?
I was in Sweden.
I remember the snow on the ground.
And you could see the galaxy in the sky,
and you saw the Northern Lights.
[Sophie] Cool, right. Caramelised honey,
set custard. Usually I'd set overnight,
so I've had to put more gelatine in
than I'd want to.
[Noel] Rather than setting
one layer at a time,
with so much to get through,
Steven is planning to set three at once.
[Steven] A layer of custard
and a layer of bananas
and a layer of custard underneath.
[Noel] But as well
as perfectly set layers...
[Steven] They have to
go back in the freezer.
[Noel] ...the judges
will expect contrasting textures.
I'm starting the Genoise now.
This is gonna be the sponge element.
I picked Genoise because it's light
and airy, but it has structure.
This is for my orange sponge.
It's actually a financier recipe,
which is like a little petit fours.
It's almost got a chewy texture.
It's gonna be right at the bottom.
Using this pan
to just get it as flat as I can.
When you're stacking,
everything's a little bit out.
There's a cumulative effect.
I'm gonna cut it into a circle,
so it doesn't need to be neat round
the edges or anything like that.
It's gonna go in the oven.
[Steven] This is the last layer of custard
going on top of the bananas,
and we're gonna do
a final freeze to get it solid.
I knew this would take a while,
but it is the star of the show. Right.
[Noel] Bakers, you're halfway through.
You've got two and a half hours left,
and then blue eyes comes in
-and destroys us all.
-[Sophie] Lemon curd.
[Sandi] As well as their set
and sponge layers...
Right. What now? What now? What now?
[Sandi] ...all the finalists are hoping
to deliver an element of crunch.
[Kate] This is the coconut dacquoise,
essentially it is like
a meringue with coconut.
[Steven] So I'm making
a batch of honeycomb
and I'm gonna crush that up,
and it's gonna go in between chocolate.
My feuilletine layer,
it's basically like
a really crushed Rice Krispy cake.
It's like the Honey Monster's heart.
It's nice, isn't it?
Just gonna look at this for a bit.
It's making me sort of wistful.
Yeah, nice and springy.
[Sophie] That's lucky,
I almost forgot about that. [chuckles]
[Steven] This is the frozen insert.
I wanna get it cut
so I can get it back into the freezer,
just to give it
a little bit more chilling time.
There you go. Easy does it.
[Noel] Before they can begin
assembling their final Showstopper,
Sophie, Steven and Kate...
[Kate] There's so many processes.
[Noel] ...need to perfect a mousse
to encase their entire entremets.
This is the chocolate mousse.
For my mousse,
it's white chocolate and lavender.
So this is the yuzu
and white chocolate bavarois.
It's got a really unique flavour.
It's a bit experimental
and that's what I wanted to do.
Most of the flavours I think are terrific.
I think Kate's coconut and yuzu
will be very good together.
They're not too aggressive.
Sophie's gone for
the most diverse flavours
I think I've ever heard of.
Spot of lavender there, smell it.
Lavender and lemon.
[Sophie] I initially
went really subtle with it,
but I'm putting a fair amount in.
I'm a little bit worried about Steven's.
Chocolate is so dominant.
[Paul] Has he bitten off
more than he can chew?
[Prue] Yeah.
[Paul] He's often come to a point
where timing has been his downfall.
I want all of them
-to finish what they've started.
-[Prue] Me too. Me too.
[Paul] Is Steven gonna finish?
I think Sophie's is very complicated.
And actually, is Kate gonna be able
to give it the finesse
that she very often lacks?
Just gotta give yourself
as much time as possible
to concentrate on the assembly,
which is why I'm trying
to fly through these bits.
[Steven] I'm gonna go
and retrieve those inserts
and hopefully they've set just enough.
[Sandi] Unless they're built quickly...
I think everything is just
about set and we can go ahead.
[Sandi]
...there won't be enough remaining time
for the assembled entremets to set again.
[Kate] It's all gotta be
spot on first time.
[Sandi] So that they can be
decorated before the final judging.
[Steven] Ugh, it's a bit too sloppy.
Let's get it out.
This is the lemon curd.
[Steven] I'm gonna let it freeze
for another ten minutes,
just to reset everything.
[Kate] Push the sponge.
[Sophie] Caramelised honey.
Trying to use every single spare second.
It means that
I'm prepared for the next step.
[Sophie] This is the feuilletine.
[Kate] That is Japan in a cake tin.
[Steven] This is raspberry coulis
going over the sponges.
[Sophie] Back in the freezer,
and to set for as long as I can.
[Kate] This is gonna set now.
So I'm gonna start
doing all my decorations.
I'm gonna start off
by doing the honeycomb.
So I'm gonna use a bit of bubble wrap.
[Steven] This is gonna be messy,
but I'm gonna have to do it.
So I'm just tipping these into the moulds.
Okay, they're in.
This is cocoa butter on acetate,
and then I'm gonna use
melted chocolate on top of this.
[Steven] Take half the jam with me.
It's meant to be my honey bee.
I stuck down little strips of tape
then painted coloured cocoa butter on,
so the chocolate will show through,
and he'll have stripes
Don't know why it's a he.
Well, it is a he isn't it,
'cause only the Queen's... Yeah.
[Steven] This freezes.
Right, my gorgeous finalists,
you've got one hour left.
The entremet needed half an hour more
than it's gonna get in the freezer.
[Kate] Got a nice shine on it, hasn't it?
Come on. Come on, freeze, freeze, freeze.
This is a dragon fruit.
It's gonna be decoration for the top.
[Steven] So soft that I'm worried
it's not gonna hold
when I take it out the mould.
[exhales air sharply]
[Sophie] I have got a chocolate collar.
[Kate] This is gonna be
tuile if it hopefully works.
-Keep calm. Keep the nerves under control.
-Yeah.
-Here, sweetie.
-Thank you so much.
[Sophie] Probably should've
done bigger wings.
I'm gonna get it out
and have a look at it.
[Sophie] It's set enough.
[inhales air deeply] Right,
just carry on. Just carry on.
I've got an entremet. Whether it's a
good entremet remains to be seen, eh?
[Sophie] Yeah, that's set fine.
Gonna work on my mirror-glaze.
[Steven] Let me get this entremet out.
It's holding its shape,
I just gotta be so careful.
[Kate] It needs to be 30 degrees Celsius.
[Sandi] Bakers, just 15 minutes.
Gonna be close. Gonna be close.
That is white chocolate and cocoa butter.
[Kate] Right,
I think that I'm gonna go for it.
[Steven] Right.
The best you're gonna get out of that.
Oh, God, don't inhale cocoa butter.
[Sophie] Moment of truth.
It look a bit more like marble
but less squiggly.
[Steven] Wish me luck.
If I can't present something beautiful,
I'll present what I can.
[Sophie] Got to add the chocolate collar.
Oh, no, bit of a crack.
I need to get it on a cake stand.
[Steven] Yin needs to meet Yang.
Wha...
[Kate] It's on.
Not the beautiful entremet I imagined.
[Sophie] There's cracks
all over the place.
Bakers, you have one minute.
[whistles] Where are me balls?
Come on, Steven.
What's he doing? What's he doing?
[Steven] Come on, come on,
come on. Don't leave.
Bakers, you final challenge is over.
Wow!
[Sophie] What a relief.
It's all over, it's all over.
[speaking indistinctly]
-[Sandi] Well done.
-[laughs] Well done.
[Noel] Well done. Well done.
[Sandi] You did it. Congratulations.
[Noel] You got through it.
[Sophie] Well, you've done well...
-Right, it's not all...
-Well done.
[chuckles] Our kids have all grown up.
[cheering and applauding]
[Sandi whistles]
I'm crying now.
Quite beautiful, actually.
[Sophie] Baked our little socks off.
[Sandi] Outside the tent,
the baker's friends
and family have arrived,
along with a few familiar faces.
I had butterflies this morning
coming back to the tent,
which is ridiculous,
considering I'm not baking.
It is really amazing to be back.
I've missed everyone so much.
"Hi, how are you?"
It's like sort of like a reunion.
If I had to pick a winner, er...
I'm not gonna choose.
It'd be like choosing
your favourite child.
They are all fantastic bakers.
I want Steven to win.
He has taught me so much.
As long as he doesn't do rubbery jelly
he'll be fine.
Probably say Sophie, you know.
Being a Northern lass, I'd like Katie.
I honestly don't know who it's gonna be.
[whispers] Steven.
[snickers]
[Noel] It's judgement time
for the final show stopping entremets.
Sophie, please bring up
your final Showstopper.
Thank you, Sophie. Can you tell us
all about your entremet please?
So I've named my entremet,
"Ode to the Honey Bee."
There's an orange blossom financier sponge
and there is a blackberry jelly.
Then there is a feuilletine
caramelised honey custard,
a set lemon curd, a white chocolate
and lavender mousse, and a mirror-glaze.
[Prue] I think the overall look
is absolutely beautiful.
It's original, it's pretty,
the marbling is absolutely stunning.
[Paul]
The collar's broken up a little bit,
but the honeycomb with the bee,
with the flower, with the marble,
-I think is exceptional.
-Thank you.
[Paul] Wow, the knife just fell through.
[Prue] That's great.
Look at that.
That is just set,
and they're not running
into each other, the layers?
Very neat, the jelly especially.
[Prue] And it's just holding together.
That is amazing.
Mmm, lemon and lavender,
has got to be the new taste.
[chuckles]
[sighs]
I love it.
Being the theme
of the entremet is the honey,
that's the first thing you get,
and it's not overly sweet.
The jelly with that little tartness,
the sponge is just right
'cause it gives it that little bit
of bite to the whole thing.
And even the lemon
and the lavender work as well.
Every one of the creamy, jelly layers
is the right degree of gelatine.
It's not rubbery, it's not liquid,
and on top of all that,
it tastes fantastic.
-Thank you.
-[Paul] Thank you.
[Sophie] Thank you so much.
[exhales]
Kate, would you like to bring
your entremet up to the table, please?
[Prue chuckles] Oh, flew off.
Kate, remind us about your entremet.
It's yuzu and white chocolate bavarois
on top of coconut dacquoise
with lychee jelly and yuzu zest sponge,
and then a yuzu and white chocolate glaze.
It's tremendously unusual
and beautifully done.
The glaze is as shiny as a bathroom tile.
The mirror-finish
you got on the top is beautiful,
and the colour choices are superb.
Well, that dropped really well, actually.
[Prue] Oh, look at that. Wow. Wow.
[Paul] They're big,
and they're bold, and they're equal.
I think that yuzu flavour is just
so sharp and delicious, and surprising.
It starts of tasting like grapefruit,
and then you know it's not grapefruit.
Mmm, it's lovely.
I love the flavour combinations.
The bavarois, it's that light citrus.
And have you put that
in the jelly as well?
Because it's got this beautiful citrus
hit as well in there.
That meringue and coconut
is a little stroke of genius
because it's a different flavour.
It's very harmonious
with the lemony flavours
and it's drier than the bavarois,
so you get the contrast of texture
and the contrast of flavour
-and I think it's really beautiful.
-Okay.
The jelly melts in the mouth,
not too much gelatine in there.
The sponge and then
that light bavarois is sublime.
I'd eat that all day.
-Thank you.
-[Sandi] Well done.
[Kate] Thank you.
-Well done, Kate.
-This could make you win.
Good luck, Steve.
Thank you.
Steven, please bring up
your final Showstopper.
Steven, tell us all about
your entremet, please.
So insider there is a hazelnut dacquoise,
Genoise sponge with a raspberry coulis.
There is bananas and custard
surrounded by chocolate mousse.
On the yin side
is white chocolate flocking,
and on the yang side, galaxy mirror glaze.
That is extraordinary glazing.
It looks like a shell, it's amazing.
The contrast is there,
but I almost want this to be smoother
and a little bit more refined.
This looks a little as if it's unfinished.
I'm gonna go for the mirror.
The distinctive layers
upsets me a little bit.
Because this all comes down to timing,
-which I've said before.
-Yeah.
The mirror glaze is not quite set,
and so the knife is taking the colour
through to the next layer,
and the next layer's
been pushed through to the next layer.
Love the bananas,
love the chocolate mousse.
If I was to close my eyes and eat that,
that's a chocolate mousse
with a bit of banana in.
You're not getting
too many textures in there.
I want to cut a bit of the other side
because that blue glaze
is making a muddle.
To me, it's exactly the same.
You've got bleeding of each of the layers.
It's hard to distinguish any layers
except the dominant ones,
the chocolate and the banana.
It's almost too much of a good thing.
It's very rich and sweet.
I don't think you'd be
able to eat a lot of it.
I just think you missed the trick here.
-Mmm.
-I think you missed a trick.
-Thank you very much.
-[Steven] Thank you.
[Sandi] Paul and Prue
now have a huge decision to make.
The three bakers
came into the Showstopper pretty even.
So is this a very difficult decision?
You have elements in all these
which are just sheer perfection.
You have something
exceptional from Sophie.
Sophie's marbling on top is just amazing.
You have flavours, and the mirror glaze
from Kate is gorgeous.
On the other hand, I'm sure
Steven feels a little bit down,
because I don't think Steven's
is as good as the other two.
Steven's let himself down a little bit.
Well, ten weeks of amazing memories,
but it comes down to this.
And I do not think it is an easy decision.
I came in here thinking I knew who'd win,
and the more I think about it,
I'm gonna change my mind.
But I'm not gonna tell you who.
Hopefully you will eventually,
-there's a lot of people out there.
-And then you can tell them.
[audience cheering and applauding]
[Sophie] Oh, my God!
[Noel] Before the winner is revealed,
Steven, Kate, and Sophie
can finally join their family and friends.
I am feeling very nervous.
It can go any way and I'll be
incredibly pleased and proud of them,
and especially because I count Katie
and Steven very much my friends now.
[Kate] Genuinely, whoever won it
would be deserved,
because we've all come
so far from where we started from.
[Steven] Hey, Mum.
I haven't let go of that dream of winning.
It left me, halfway through the bake,
it left me but I clawed it back.
[Judy] Come and sit down. Come on.
[Steven] I could still win.
[sighs]
[all cheering]
Hello, thank you all for coming.
The moment's here, I'd like to ask
the three finalists to step forward.
Big round of applause for Kate,
Steven, and Sophie.
[all cheering and applauding]
Aw, go on then. Go on, lad.
Good luck.
Right, guys, I have the huge honour
of announcing... I'm gonna cry.
I have the huge honour
of announcing the winner.
You three are amazing, but I'm afraid
there can only be one champion.
The winner is...
Sophie.
[all cheering and applauding]
Well done.
-I'm gonna cry.
-[Steven] Oh, you got tears.
-Well done, Sophie.
-Thank you, Paul.
You deserve it, hon.
That's yours, my dear.
You're such a clever girl
and you deserve it.
I'm sure it'll sink in
but it hasn't, hasn't quite yet.
-[Sandi] Well done, Sophie.
-Thank you.
Thank you so much, darling.
Aw, you did it.
-You really...
-Pinch myself
Amazing.
Oh, my God.
Can I be honest?
I got a little bit emotional there.
And it's because Sandi
got a little bit emotional.
So I sort of walked off quite quickly
and went, "It's the wind.
It's the wind in my eye."
I made up for it.
[Noel] Well done.
[Paul] It's been
a real learning curve for Sophie.
To come up with that entremet
in the final bake, you know, it...
I was really shocked about the standard.
Sophie seems very calm,
but she's not that confident,
possibly because she knows everybody else
has had more experience than she has.
Oh, I'm so proud of her.
Actually, I'm really proud of all of them.
You done well. This is not the end of you.
Lost to a really brilliant,
really, really brilliant baker,
so fair play to the girl.
[Sophie] Oh, Julia.
Well done, I'm so proud of you.
I know Sophie can appear quite tough
but she's not, she's soft.
-Tom.
-Well done.
She was as scared as Kate and I were,
and for the first time in ten weeks
I saw a vulnerability.
She's put her heart and soul into this,
as we all have,
but she put her heart and soul into it
and she earned it.
She really earned it.
It's the first you've lost your cool.
I'm so... I'm worried,
I'm gonna keep pinching myself.
[Sophie] Baking, I thought
it was almost like a bit of a calling.
So to go from just that sort of idea that,
sort of initial inspiration
but I never dared think about it
until we were here.
Met some brilliant people, and then
I got to the final and now I'm here.
It is beyond anything.
Anything I thought or dreamed off.
What a privilege?
Yeah, it's pretty mega.
[all cheering and applauding]